Auto-Exposure Fusion for Single-Image Shadow Removal
Lan Fu1*, Changqing Zhou2∗, Qing Guo2†, Felix Juefei-Xu3, Hongkai Yu4,
Wei Feng5, Yang Liu2, Song Wang1
1University of South Carolina, USA,
2Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3Alibaba Group, USA,
4Cleveland State University, USA,
5Tianjin University, China
Abstract
Shadow removal is still a challenging task due to its inher-
ent background-dependent1 and spatial-variant properties,
leading to unknown and diverse shadow patterns. Even
powerful deep neural networks could hardly recover trace-
less shadow-removed background. This paper proposes a
new solution for this task by formulating it as an exposure
fusion problem to address the challenges. Intuitively, we
ﬁrst estimate multiple over-exposure images w.r.t. the input
image to let the shadow regions in these images have the
same color with shadow-free areas in the input image. Then,
we fuse the original input with the over-exposure images
to generate the ﬁnal shadow-free counterpart. Neverthe-
less, the spatial-variant property of the shadow requires
the fusion to be sufﬁciently ‘smart’, that is, it should auto-
matically select proper over-exposure pixels from different
images to make the ﬁnal output natural. To address this chal-
lenge, we propose the shadow-aware FusionNet that takes
the shadow image as input to generate fusion weight maps
across all the over-exposure images. Moreover, we propose
the boundary-aware ReﬁneNet to eliminate the remaining
shadow trace further. We conduct extensive experiments on
the ISTD, ISTD+, and SRD datasets to validate our method’s
effectiveness and show better performance in shadow re-
gions and comparable performance in non-shadow regions
over the state-of-the-art methods.
We release the code
in https://github.com/tsingqguo/exposure-
fusion-shadow-removal.
1. Introduction
Shadows are present in most natural images where the
light source is blocked.
Spatial-variant color and illu-
mination distortion presented in the shadow region can
*Lan Fu and Changqing Zhou are co-ﬁrst authors and contribute equally.
†Corresponding author: Qing Guo (tsingqguo@ieee.org)
1Background means the shadow-covered context in this paper.
Figure 1: A: Illustration of the proposed auto-exposure fusion for shadow
removal. B: Visualization results of our shadow removal results with the
state-of-the-art methods. a) and b) are the shadow removal results of SP+M-
Net [17] and DSC [14], respectively.
hinder the performance of other computer vision tasks
[3, 16, 24, 29, 36], such as object detection and tracking,
object recognition, semantic segmentation, etc.
Previous shadow removal works either model this task
based on physical shadow models for paired shadow and
shadow-free images [17] or model it as an image-to-image
translation problem based on the generative adversarial net-
works (GAN) for unpaired shadow and shadow-free images
[15]. However, the learned shadow removal transforma-
tions by GAN-based methods, e.g., MaskShadowGAN [15],
tend to generate artifacts and image blur. They also suffer
from data distribution requirements, where they expect the
unpaired shadow and shadow-free image sets to share sta-

tistical similarity [20], which is hard to be satisﬁed when
data acquisition is unstable. On the other hand, the publicly
available large-scale datasets of paired shadow and shadow-
free images, such as SRD [27], ISTD [32], and ISTD+ [17],
allow shadow removal tasks to learn a physically plausible
transformation in a supervised way. In this paper, we focus
on paired training data to perform the shadow removal task.
Shadow casting decreases the image quality with color
and illumination degradation, over-exposure of the shadow
image is an effective way to enhance the image quality. Intu-
itively, fusing the over-exposed one and the original shadow
image could obtain the desired shadow-free image. Recent
shadow decomposition works [17, 18], based on physical
shadow models, mainly learn to relight the shadow image
to a lit version and then fuse them together to acquire the
desired shadow-free image via a shadow matte. However,
since shadow casting degrades the color and illumination
across the spatial region in a background-dependent and
spatial-variant manner (i.e., the contiguous shadow cast on
the background image may cause the shadow region to ap-
pear differently based on how the original shadow-free back-
ground region looks like, as well as where the shadow is cast
spatially on the background image), we argue that multiple
over-exposure fusion allows much higher level of ﬂexibility
and can provide a better solution to compensate the shadow
region to have the same color and illumination with its non-
shadow area, and better recovers the underlying content of
the shadow region.
Shadow removal is still a challenging task for powerful
state-of-the-art deep neural networks (DNN). Unknown and
diverse shadow patterns pose two challenges to existing
DNN based solutions: ❶Shadow removal is a background-
dependent task, which requires DNN to not only recover
the illumination and color consistency with the shadow free
area but also to preserve the content underlying the shadow.
The spatial-variant property of shadow area requires that
the fusion should be ‘smart’ enough to adaptively select the
desired over-exposure pixels from various images to obtain
the ﬁnal shadow-free version. ❷It is hard to obtain traceless
background due to inconsistent shadow patterns along the
boundary and inside the shadow region.
In this paper, we propose a novel method, named auto-
exposure fusion network, for single image shadow removal,
as shown in Fig. 1(A). We ﬁrst utilize exposure estimation
to learn multiple over-exposure images by compensating
the shadow region with different exposure levels. Then we
propose the shadow-aware FusionNet in Sec. 3.3 to produce
fusion weight maps across all the over-exposure images for
addressing the ﬁrst challenge. It can ‘smartly’ select which
over-exposed pixel is the best one to recover the position-
speciﬁc background. The proposed method fuses the input
image and its over-exposure versions in a pixel-wise way.
Further, we propose a boundary-aware ReﬁneNet in Sec. 3.4,
to remove the remaining shadow trace for reﬁning the re-
moval result obtained in the previous step. Figure 1(B) shows
that the proposed method can obtain traceless background
image than the state-of-the-art methods SP+M-Net [17] and
DSC [14]. The contributions of this paper are:
• To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the ﬁrst work
to study the shadow removal problem from the perspective
of auto-exposure fusion.
• To accurately remove the shadow, we propose a new
learning-based shadow-aware FusionNet followed by a
boundary-aware ReﬁneNet to accurately estimate, smartly
fuse, and meticulously reﬁne multiple over-exposure maps.
• The comprehensive experimental results on the public
ISTD, ISTD+, and SRD datasets show that the proposed
method achieved better performance in shadow regions
and comparable performance in non-shadow regions over
the state-of-the-art methods.
2. Related Work
Shadow removal. Traditional shadow removal methods
employ prior information, e.g., gradient [9], illumination
[35, 30, 33], and region [13, 31], for removing shadows. Re-
cent deep learning based shadow removal methods boost the
removal performance because of the available large-scale
datasets of paired and unpaired shadow and shadow free
images [17, 5, 15]. The Deshadow-Net [27] extracted multi-
context features, involving global localization, appearance,
and semantics, to predict a shadow matte layer for remov-
ing shadow in an end-to-end manner. Wang et al. proposed
ST-CGAN [32] for joint shadow detection and removal by
employing a stacked conditional GAN framework. The DSC
[37] additionally utilized direction-aware context to improve
shadow detection and removal. Le et al. [17] proposed to
remove shadows from the perspective of shadow decompo-
sition. On the other hand, the GAN based methods, e.g.,
MaskShadowGAN [15], made it possible to perform shadow
removal on unpaired shadow and shadow free images by
viewing it as an image-to-image translation problem. How-
ever, these methods suffered from artifacts and image blur.
They also required the unpaired shadow and shadow free
image sets to have similar statistical distribution.
We model the shadow removal problem from a novel
direction, i.e., an auto-exposure fusion problem on paired
shadow and shadow free images. Multiple over-exposure
shadow images are generated to compensate the color and
illumination degradation in the shadow region, then they are
‘smartly’ fused together to obtain the shadow free image.
Exposure fusion. Common imaging sensors’ capture
range is generally limited, a picture will often turn out to be
under/over exposed in real world scene. Multi-exposure im-
age fusion (MEF) can help to reﬁne the image quality by fus-
ing multi-exposure images into one. MEF algorithms aim to
compute the fusion weight map for each image and fuse the

Figure 2: Illustration of the proposed framework for shadow removal with shadow-aware FusionNet and boundary-aware ReﬁneNet.
input sequence with a weighted sum operation. Traditional
MEF methods [8, 23] generally performed fusion locally
or pixel wisely with hand-crafted features. Goshtasby et al.
[8] proposed a patch-wise MEF by fusing uniform blocks
with the best-exposed information chosen from each image.
Mertens et al. [23] utilized perceptual factors, such as con-
trast and saturation, to construct an efﬁcient pixel-wise MEF.
Li et al. [19] proposed a guided ﬁlter based fusion approach,
taking advantage of spatial consistency, with a two-scale
decomposition. Ma et al. [21] performed image fusion by
optimizing a structural similarity index (MEF-SSIM) with a
novel gradient descent-based method. Recent deep learning
based techniques have improved the fusion performance due
to high representation abilities. DeepFuse network [26] per-
formed multi-exposure fusion in an unsupervised manner by
employing a loss function without reference image quality.
MEF-Net [22], proposed by Ma et al., optimized the percep-
tually calibrated MEF-SSIM to predict and reﬁne the fusion
weight maps. In addition to these standard MEF methods for
image enhancement, recent works also discussed the effects
of MEF to the image classiﬁcation [6, 2] from the angle of
adversarial attack [12] by estimating the adversarial fusion
weights with kernel prediction [10, 11].
In this paper, we utilize exposure fusion for the shadow
removing task. Over-exposure is an effective way to enhance
the image quality of shadow area. We employ pixel-wise
fusion for a sequence of over-exposure images and shadow
image to obtain the desired shadow-free image.
3. Methodology
In this section, we propose to formulate the shadow re-
moval as an exposure fusion problem to recover traceless
background in the shadow image. We introduce the whole
framework in Sec. 3.1 and reveal the challenges. In Sec. 3.2,
we explain how we generate the multi-exposure images for
fusion. Then, our two main contributions, i.e., shadow-
aware FusionNet in Sec. 3.3 and boundary-aware ReﬁneNet
in Sec. 3.4, help to address the challenges and achieve much
better deshadowed images.
3.1. Exposure Fusion for Shadow Removal
We recast the shadow removal task as an exposure fusion
problem and it can be formulated as
ˆI = φ(Is),
(1)
where φ(·) denotes a transfer function that can map the
shadow image Is to the corresponding shadow free image ˆI.
A well-exposure image, i.e., shadow free image, could be
obtained by exposure fusion of brackets of multi-exposure
images to improve the image quality of shadow image. The
purpose of employing image over exposure is to compensate
the shadow region to have the same color and illumination
as the non-shadow region. In this paper, we formulate the
shadow region as an under exposed area of the shadow image.
Then the problem left is to recover this area to its counterpart
version which has the consistent color and illumination with
the unshadowed area. Then, we can reformulate Eq. (1) to
ˆI = φ(Is, Io
i), i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N},
(2)
where Io
i corresponds to the i-th over-exposure image of
shadow image Is. An intuitive way to solve it is to esti-
mate an over-exposure version of the shadow image and then
fuse them together to directly infer the desired shadow-free
one. Nevertheless, shadow region is background-dependent
and presents spatial-variant property, i.e., the color and illu-
mination distortion across shadow region is variant, single
over-exposure could not adaptively reﬂect the degradation
in spatial space.
Therefore, we propose an auto-exposure fusion network
for fusing shadow image with sequence of over exposed
shadow images aiming to obtain the shadow free one. The
whole framework of shadow removal is shown in Fig. 2. In
Sec. 3.2, we employ a deep learning network to generate
a sequence of over exposed shadow images. Then we pro-
pose the shadow-aware FusionNet in Sec. 3.3 to ‘smartly’
fuse brackets of exposed images by generating fusion weight
maps across each pixel of the input image to adaptively
recover the color and illumination. However, due to the ex-
isting partial shadowed region, it is hard to obtain traceless

Figure 3: Illustration of the proposed shadow-aware FusionNet.
background due to the inconsistent shadow patterns along
the boundary and inside the shadow area. Further, we pro-
pose a boundary-aware ReﬁneNet in Sec. 3.4, to remove the
residual shadow trace with the help of boundary mask.
3.2. Over-exposure Sequence Generation
We generate multiple exposure images through channel-
wise weighting of the shadow image Is as following:
Io
i = αiIs + βi, i ∈{1, 2, . . . , N},
(3)
where αi ∈R3×1 controls the exposure degree of the i-th
over-exposure image and βi ∈R3×1 decides the potential
intensity shifting. To realize the goal of shadow removal, we
should estimate {αi} and {βi} to make the shadow regions
in the generated over-exposure images have the same color
with the shadow-free regions in Is. To this end, we aim to
train a DNN to estimate the exposure parameters adaptively
by taking the shadow image and shadow mask Im as input.
Nevertheless, estimating all of the N exposure parameters
directly via a DNN could let the training difﬁcult. Instead,
we adopt a two-stage way: ﬁrst, we train a DNN to estimate
the median exposure degree, i.e., α N
2 and β N

(α N
2 , β N
2 ) = ϕ(Is, Im),
(4)
where ϕ(·) denotes the DNN for exposure parameter estima-
tion. Second, we generate all exposure images by performing
a simple interpolation on α N
2 and β N
2 with the assumption
that the over-exposure sequence’s images have similar color
with minor difference
[αi, βi] = γi[α N
2 , β N
2 ], i ∈1, 2, . . . , N,
(5)
where {γi} denotes the interpolation coefﬁcients. Then, the
key problem becomes how to train ϕ(·), which is a deep
regression problem. The input data of exposure estimation
is the shadow image and corresponding shadow mask. The
ground truth of α N
2 β N
2 is calculated by performing the least
squares method [1] on the shadow mask covered regions of
shadow image and its shadow-free counterpart. We optimize
the exposure estimation by minimizing the mean squared er-
ror (MSE) between the estimated parameters and its ground
truth. Note that, exposure parameters are estimated inde-
pendently between color channels to adaptively adjust color
distortion caused by shadow as well as camera sensor. We
provide more details in the Sec. 3.5.
3.3. Shadow-aware FusionNet
In this section, we design the FusionNet to fuse the gen-
erated over-exposure images {Io
i} and produce the shadow-
free image ˆI. Intuitively, we can fuse {Io
i} by assigning each
pixel a weight across different exposure degree
ˆI[p] =
N
X
i=0
Wi[p]Io
i[p],
(6)
where Io
0 = Is, and Wi has the same size with Io
i. Actually,
such process means that each pixel of the ﬁnal shadow-
free image is the linear combination of N over-exposure
images at the same pixel position and is fused independently.
However, the fusion strategy ignores the local smoothness,
leading to less natural or even noisy fusion results. Then, we
further extend Eq. (6) by
ˆI[p] =
N
X
i=0
(Ki ⊛Io
i)[p] =
N
X
i=0
X
q∈N (p)
kp
i [p −q]Io
i[q], (7)
where ⊛denotes the pixel-wise convolution, i.e., each pixel
is ﬁltered by a kernel that is not shared by other pixels.
Speciﬁcally, the p-th pixel of Io
i (e.g., Io
i[p]) and its neigh-
boring pixels (i.e., {Io
i[q]|q ∈N(p)}) are linearly combined
by an exclusive kernel (i.e., kp
i the p-th kernel in Ki) as the
combination weights and kp
i [p −q] denotes [p −q]-th ele-
ments of kp
i . N(p) is the neighboring pixels of p. Compared

with Eq. (6), Eq. (7) considers the neighboring pixels’ color
and could avoid potential noisy results with better removal
effect. We denote K = {Ki} as pixel-wise fusion kernels.
Then, the key of generating the true shadow-free image
is to estimate the fusion kernels accurately. Motivated by
above process, we propose to estimate the fusion weight
maps by training a CNN that takes the shadow image with
shadow mask for guidance
K = FusionNet(Im, Io),
(8)
where Im is the shadow mask. The FusionNet is required to
understand the shadow images and predict kernels that can
spatially adapt to different shadow-covered contexts, thus
can select suitable pixels from the multiple over-exposure
images for shadow removal.
The pipeline of the shadow-aware FusionNet is shown in
Fig. 3. FusionNet achieves shadow free recovery by ‘smartly’
selecting position-speciﬁc over-exposure pixels. The input
data includes brackets of multiple exposure images, i.e., the
shadow image Is, corresponding shadow mask Im, and over-
exposure images {Io
i}. FusionNet generates fusion weight
maps, across all over-exposure images, to ‘smartly’ fuse the
proper pixels from over-exposure versions with the shadow
ones to the shadow free counterpart. Shadow mask Im acts as
a fusion guidance for FusionNet to let it assign low weights
to non-shadow region and focus mostly on the shadow region,
which is shown by the fusion weight maps in Fig. 3.
We employ L1 distance to optimize our shadow-aware
FusionNet. The loss function Lpix(ˆI,ˆI∗) is the pixel-wise
L1 distance between the ground truth shadow free image ˆI∗
and the shadow removed image ˆI
Lpix(ˆI,ˆI∗) = ∥ˆI∗−ˆI∥1.
(9)
3.4. Boundary-aware ReﬁneNet
Partially shadowed (penumbra) pixels exist along the
shadow boundary. Inconsistent shadow patterns along the
shadow boundary and inside the shadow region are still
a challenge to state-of-the-art solutions to obtain traceless
background. To solve this issue, we propose a boundary-
aware ReﬁneNet to eliminate the remaining shadow trace,
which is shown in Fig. 4. It acts as a reﬁnement of the shadow
removal result obtained from FusionNet. Speciﬁcally, we
model the boundary-aware ReﬁneNet as
F = ReﬁneNet(Is, Im, Imb,ˆI),
(10)
where Imb is a penumbra mask, as shown in Fig. 4. Similar
to Eq. (7), F is also pixel-wise reﬁne kernels that integrate
the context of pixel’s k × k neighborhood region with that
pixel to remove remaining trace. Then the reﬁned shadow
free image becomes
ˆIr[p] = (F ⊛ˆI)[p] =
X
q∈N (p)
f p[p −q]ˆI[q]
(11)
Figure 4: Illustration of the proposed boundary-aware ReﬁneNet.
where f p ∈Rk×k is the exclusive kernel for performing
convolution between the k × k neighboring pixels of the
pixel p (i.e., N(p)) and the kernel weights in f p.
ReﬁneNet’s input data includes: the shadow image Is,
shadow mask Im, penumbra mask Imb, and initial shadow
removal result ˆI. Penumbra mask acts as a guidance for
ReﬁneNet to keep color and illumination consistency of the
shadow removed, shadow boundary, and the non-shadow
regions. Penumbra mask Imb is extracted by computing the
difference between dilated shadow mask Imd and eroded
shadow mask Ime for the penumbra region. We dilate/erode
the shadow mask by 7 pixels to generate Imd and Ime. The
goal of ReﬁneNet is to output a reﬁned shadow removal
image without trace.
The pixel-wise L1 distance Lpix(ˆIr,ˆI∗), between the
ground-truth shadow-free image ˆI∗and the reﬁned version
of shadow removed image ˆIr, is utilized to optimize the
boundary-aware ReﬁneNet. In addition, inspired by Pois-
son image editing [25], we propose a boundary-aware loss
Lbd(ˆIr,ˆIs,ˆI∗, Im) to seamlessly remove the shadow. It is
deﬁned as
Lbd(ˆIr,ˆIs,ˆI∗, Im) = MSE(∇ˆIr, ∇ˆIs) ∗(1 −Im)
+ MSE(∇ˆIr, ∇ˆI∗) ∗Im
(12)
where ∇denotes the Laplacian gradient operator. It aims to
minimize the gradient domain along the shadow boundary.
It keeps the same gradient domain of non-shadow region
between predicted shadow-free image ˆIr and shadow image
ˆIs. At the same time, it reduces the difference of gradient
domain between predicted shadow-free image ˆIr and ground-
truth one ˆI∗in the shadow region. The total loss of ReﬁneNet
is a weighted sum of Lpix(ˆIr,ˆI∗) and Lbd(ˆIr,ˆIs,ˆI∗, Im), as
shown in Fig. 4. We set λ to 0.1 in the experiment.
3.5. Implementation Details
The proposed pipeline is implemented in PyTorch. The
details of network setting and training are:
1) Exposure estimation is trained together with FusionNet.
Its goal is to estimate the median-exposure version of the
input shadow image. We employ ResNeXt [34] as backbone

Table 1: Shadow removal results of our networks compared to state-of-the-
art shadow removal methods on the ISTD [32] dataset.
Method \ RMSE
Shadow
Non-Shadow
All
Input Image
32.12
7.19
10.97
Guo et al. [13]
18.95
7.46
9.30
Gong et al. [35]
14.98
7.29
8.53
MaskShadow-GAN [15]
12.67
6.68
7.41
ST-CGAN [32]
10.33
6.93
7.47
DSC [14]
9.76
6.14
6.67
DHAN [4]
8.14
6.04
6.37
Ours
7.77
5.56
5.92
to do the estimation. We set the number of over-exposure
images N to 5 by linearly interpolating the estimated expo-
sure parameters with scaling factors between [0.95, 1.05].
For FusionNet, we employ a DNN with U-Net256 [28] as
backbone.
2) Then boundary-aware ReﬁneNet is to improve the
shadow removal result with the same backbone as Fusion-
Net. We train the ReﬁneNet with exposure estimation and
FusionNet together but freezing the latter two. Both Fusion-
Net and ReﬁneNet take the shadow mask as input, and we
describe the setting of the datasets in Sec. 4.1.
In our experiments, same training parameters setting are
employed for these three parts. The input image is resized
to 256×256. The minibatch size is 8 and the initial learning
rate is set to 0.0001. We use Adam optimizer for all the
networks. We trained 400 epochs for each network.
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets and evaluation measurement
Datasets. We train and evaluate the proposed method on
three public datasets: ISTD [32], adjusted ISTD (ISTD+)
[17], and SRD [27] datasets. They all have paired shadow
and shadow-free images. Dataset ISTD and its adjusted
version also have shadow masks. We introduce these three
datasets as following:
1) The training set of ISTD dataset has 1,330 triplets of
shadow, shadow free, and shadow mask images. The testing
split consists of 540 triplets. The ISTD+ dataset has the same
number of triplets with ISTD except that it adjusts the color
inconsistency, between the shadow and shadow free image,
with image processing algorithm [17]. The color mismatch
results from the data acquisition setup. We use ground-truth
shadow masks for training stage, while for inference, we
compute the shadow masks by operating Otsu’s algorithm
to the difference between shadow and shadow free images,
similar to MaskShadow-GAN [15]. We additionally reﬁne
these masks by a median ﬁlter to remove noises.
2) SRD dataset consists of 408 pairs of shadow and
shadow free images without the ground-truth shadow mask.
Here we simply use an adaptive threshold detection method,
same as the one used in ISTD dataset, to extract the shadow
Table 2: Shadow removal results of our networks compared to state-of-the-
art shadow removal methods on the ISTD+ [17] dataset.
Method \ RMSE
Shadow
Non-Shadow
All
Input Image
40.2
2.6
8.5
Guo et al. [13]
22.0
3.1
6.1
Gong et al. [7]
13.3
-
-
ST-CGAN [32]
13.4
7.7
8.7
DeshadowNet [27]
15.9
6.0
7.6
MaskShadow-GAN [15]
12.4
4.0
5.3
Param+M+D-Net [18]
9.7
3.0
4.0
SP+M-Net [17]
7.9
3.1
3.9
Ours
6.5
3.8
4.2
mask from the difference between shadow free and shadow
images. The extracted shadow masks are used both for train-
ing and testing. We utilize the public shadow masks provided
by DHAN [4] for evaluation.
Evaluation measures. We utilize the root mean square
error (RMSE) in LAB color space between the shadow re-
moval result and the ground-truth shadow free image to
evaluate the shadow removal performance, following pre-
vious works [32, 13, 27, 17, 4]. We directly compare our
auto-exposure fusion framework with several state-of-the-art
methods on the ISTD, ISTD+, and SRD datasets in quantita-
tive and qualitative ways.
4.2. Shadow removal evaluation on ISTD dataset
We ﬁrst report the shadow removal results of our method
on ISTD dataset [32], as shown in Table 1. We compare the
proposed method with the state-of-the-art algorithms: Guo
et al. [13], Gong et al. [7], ST-CGAN [32], MaskShadow-
GAN [15], DSC [14], and DHAN [4]. Different from other
methods, MaskShadow-GAN utilizes unpaired shadow and
shadow free images for training. The ﬁrst row shows the
RMSE values of the input shadow image and corresponding
shadow free image without shadow removal operation. It
shows that the proposed method obtains the best shadow re-
moval performance in both shadow and non-shadow regions,
leading to the lowest RMSE in the whole image. Speciﬁcally,
the proposed method outperforms DSC [14] by 20.3% and
11.2% RMSE decreasing in shadow region and the whole im-
age, respectively. The proposed method also outperforms the
method DHAN [4] by reducing the RMSE from 8.14 to 7.77
in the shadow region. Training with unpaired data doesn’t
perform as well as training with paired version. Speciﬁcally,
the proposed method outperforms MaskShadow-GAN by
38.6% and 20.1% RMSE decreasing in the shadow region
and the whole area, respectively.
We also report the shadow removal performance of our
proposed method on the adjusted ISTD (ISTD+) [17] dataset.
As shown in Table 2, we compare the proposed method
with state-of-the-art algorithms: Guo et al. [13], Gong et
al. [7], ST-CGAN [32], DeshadowNet [27], MaskShadow-
GAN [15], Param+M+D-Net [18], and SP+M-Net [17]. It

Table 3: Shadow removal results of our networks compared to state-of-the-
art shadow removal methods on the SRD [27] dataset.
Method \ RMSE
Shadow
Non-Shadow
All
Input Image
40.28
4.76
14.11
Guo et al. [13]
29.89
6.47
12.60
DeshadowNet [27]
11.78
4.84
6.64
DSC [14]
10.89
4.99
6.23
DHAN [4]
8.94
4.80
5.67
Ours
8.56
5.75
6.51
turns out that the proposed method achieves the best shadow
removal performance in the shadow region, outperforming
SP+M-Net by 17.7% lower RMSE. It outperforms the De-
shadowNet and ST-CGAN trained with paired shadow and
shadow-free images, decreasing the RMSE by 59.1% and
51.4%, respectively. Compared to methods training with
unpaired data, training with paired images still acquire better
results. The proposed method outperforms Param+M+D-Net
by about 32.9%, trained with unpaired shadow and shadow
free patches. The proposed method achieves the comparable
performance in the non-shadow and whole image region.
Figure 5 shows the visualization results of shadow re-
moval from our methods and other state-of-the-art methods
on the ISTD dataset. We can see that our result could re-
cover traceless background in the shadow region. We can
clearly see that traditional method, Guo et al. [13], suffers
from severe artifacts and could not recover shadowed pix-
els successfully due to limited feature representation ability.
ST-CGAN could improve the performance by training large-
scale data, while it tends to generate blurry images, random
artifacts, and incorrect colors, e.g., the fourth row shadow
removed image. MaskShadowGAN and Param+M+D-Net
also suffer from producing blurry images. Random artifacts
along the shadow boundary can be easily spotted in the result
of Param+M+D-Net, and it relights the boundary rather than
removing it. Even though DSC and SP+M-Net could remove
most of the shadow, their results still have trace along the
shadow boundary, which does not exist in our result.
4.3. Shadow removal evaluation on SRD dataset
In this section, we show our shadow removal results on
SRD dataset [27] in Table 3. We evaluate our result with
the public masks provided by DHAN [4]. The proposed
method obtains the best shadow removal results with the
lowest RMSE in the shadow region. It reduces the RMSE
from 8.94 to 8.56, compared to DHAN.
As shown in Table 3, the non-shadow region’s RMSE val-
ues of different methods are very close (mean: 5.4, standard
deviation: 0.6), which are similar to those of the Table 2 for
ISTD+ dataset (mean: 4.4, standard deviation: 1.7). How-
ever, the standard deviations of the RMSE values in shadow
region are signiﬁcantly larger. This means that different
methods including ours all perform well and very close on
the non-shadow region, and the main difﬁculty of this prob-
Table 4: Ablation study of shadow removal on the ISTD+ [17] dataset.
Method \ RMSE
Shadow
Non-Shadow
All
Input Image
40.2
2.6
8.5
Fusion-N1
7.1
3.9
4.4
Fusion-N3
7.2
3.9
4.5
Fusion-N5
6.9
4.0
4.4
Fusion+ReﬁneNet
6.6
3.8
4.3
Fusion+ReﬁneNet+Lbd
6.5
3.8
4.2
lem comes from the shadow region. For the shadow region,
our method obviously obtains the best performance.
4.4. Ablation study
We conduct ablation studies on ISTD+ dataset to eval-
uate the contribution of each step of our proposed method.
For the effectiveness of per-pixel kernel fusion, i.e., Eq. (7)
over Eq. (6), we perform Fusion-N1 which fuses pairs of
over-exposure and shadow images with the per-pixel kernel
that considers 3 × 3 neighboring pixels and with pixel-wise
fusion. It turns out that fusing image pair with neighboring
information can boost the performance from 7.6 to 7.1 for
RMSE in the shadow region, because neighboring region
provides important spatial context information to represent
the structure. We set 3 × 3 neighborhood for FusionNet.
Then, we conduct experiments to verify the effective-
ness of multiple over-exposure by controlling the number
of over-exposure images. In our implementation, we set the
number N to 1, 3, and 5. The shadow removal models are
denoted as Fusion-N1, Fusion-N3, and Fusion-N5, respec-
tively. N is set to 5 for the remaining experiments. We test
the effectiveness of boundary-aware ReﬁneNet and loss Lbd
by models Fusion+ReﬁneNet and Fusion+ReﬁneNet+Lbd,
respectively. The results are summarized in Table 4.
To estimate the effectiveness of multiple over-exposure
to the shadow-aware FusionNet, we report the performance
in shadow, non-shadow, and whole image regions with the
metric RMSE. When N is 5, the shadow removal result
in the shadow region reaches lower RMSE 6.9, compared
to when N = 1. We set N to 5 for later ablation experi-
ments. With the introducing of boundary-aware ReﬁneNet,
Fusion+ReﬁneNet improves the shadow removal perfor-
mance by about 0.3 RMSE decreasing. It veriﬁes that penum-
bra region is a challenge for shadow removal task to get
traceless background. The RMSE in non-shadow region also
decreased, compared to Fusion-N5. Further, Lbd loss opti-
mized the shadow removal model Fusion+ReﬁneNet+Lbd
better to reach the lowest RMSE 6.5, 3.8, and 4.2 in the
shadow, non-shadow and the whole image regions.
To explain the small margin of shadow removal perfor-
mance gain of Fusion-N5 over Fusion-N1, we calculate the
ground truth exposure for the p-th pixel in the shadow region
by dividing the shadow-free pixel with its shadow counter-
part for each testing example. Then, we count the average

Figure 5: Illustration of the visualization results of shadow removal on dataset ISTD [32]. a) to g) are the results from comparison methods: Guo et al. [13],
ST-CGAN [32], MaskShadow-GAN [15], Param+M+D-Net [18], DSC [14], SP+M-Net [17], and DHAN [4], respectively.
Table 5: Comparison of traceless background results in penumbra region
on ISTD+ [17] dataset.
Method \ RMSE
Penumbra
SP+M-Net [17]
7.06
Ours
5.96
and the standard deviation (std. dev.) of GT exposures of
all pixels in the shadow region for each example and show
their relationship to the example’s RMSE of the 3 variants
in Fig. 6. We see that: 1) For the most examples, Fusion-N5
and Fusion-N3 have lower RMSE than Fusion-N1&N3 and
Fusion-N1, respectively. 2) Most examples’ GT exposures
have small variations (i.e., small std. dev.) across spatial
coordinates, leading to similar RMSE on the three methods.
3) When the GT exposures’ variation become larger, the
advantages of Fusion-N3&5 become more obvious.
We also compare our method with the state-of-the-art
method SP+M-Net [17] about measuring the shadow re-
moval result without residual trace. We evaluate the RMSE
metric in the penumbra region by considering the penumbra
mask Imb as mentioned in Sec. 3.4. As shown in Table 5, our
method performs better, decreasing RMSE by 15.5%. Visu-
alizations are shown in Fig. 5(f) and ours. The SP+M-Net
does not perform well to remove the residual trace.

(a) Average of pixels’ GT exposures in Shadow Region 
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
RMSE
Fusion-N1
Fusion-N3
Fusion-N5

(b) Std. Dev. of pixels’ GT exposures in Shadow Region
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
RMSE
Fusion-N1
Fusion-N3
Fusion-N5
Figure 6: RMSE vs. average (i.e., (a)) and std. dev. (i.e., (b)) of pixels’ GT
exposures in shadow region for each testing example.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a novel and robust over-
exposure fusion method for performing shadow removal
task. Multiple over-exposure, relighting each pixel with dif-
ferent exposures, could compensate each pixel individually
to tackle position speciﬁed color and illumination degrada-
tion. It beneﬁts the shadow removal task by recovering the
natural image from the spatial variant color and illumination
degradation. Shadow-aware FusionNet smartly fuses brack-
ets of over-exposure shadow images with shadow image by
an adaptive per-pixel kernel weight map. It helps to fully
recover the background content preserving the color and illu-
mination details. The proposed boundary-aware ReﬁneNet
further eliminates the remaining trace caused by the penum-
bra area along the shadow boundary. With the boundary loss
added, by optimizing to preserve the non-shadow region and
recover the ground-truth shadow-free area of the shadow
image, our work can obtain traceless background with the
state-of-the-art shadow removal performance on the ISTD,
ISTD+, and SRD datasets. In future, we plan to solve the
challenging video shadow removal problem.
Acknowledgments:
This work was supported by the
NSFC under Grant U1803264, 61672376, 62072334, and
61671325.
It was also supported in part by the Na-
tional Research Foundation, Singapore under its AI Sin-
gapore Programme (AISG Award No: AISG2-RP-2020-
019), Singapore National Cybersecurity R&D Program No.
NRF2018NCR-NCR005-0001, National Satellite of Excel-
lence in Trustworthy Software System No.NRF2018NCR-
NSOE003-0001, and NRF Investigatorship No. NRFI06-
2020-0022.
We gratefully acknowledge the support of
NVIDIA AI Tech Center (NVAITC) and AWS Cloud Credits
for Research Award.

References
[1] Samprit Chatterjee, Ali S Hadi, et al. Inﬂuential observa-
tions, high leverage points, and outliers in linear regression.
Statistical science, 1(3):379–393, 1986.
[2] Y Cheng, F Juefei-Xu, Q Guo, H Fu, X Xie, SW Lin, W
Lin, and Y Liu. Adversarial exposure attack on diabetic
retinopathy imagery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09231, 2020.
[3] Rita Cucchiara, Costantino Grana, Massimo Piccardi, and
Andrea Prati. Detecting moving objects, ghosts, and shadows
in video streams. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 25(10):1337–1342, 2003.
[4] Xiaodong Cun, Chi-Man Pun, and Cheng Shi. Towards ghost-
free shadow removal via dual hierarchical aggregation net-
work and shadow matting gan. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence, pages 10680–10687, 2020.
[5] Bin Ding, Chengjiang Long, Ling Zhang, and Chunxia Xiao.
Argan: Attentive recurrent generative adversarial network
for shadow detection and removal. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages
10213–10222, 2019.
[6] R Gao, Q Guo, F Juefei-Xu, H Yu, X Ren, W Feng, and
S Wang. Making images undiscoverable from co-saliency
detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09258, 2020.
[7] Han Gong and Darren Cosker. Interactive removal and ground
truth for difﬁcult shadow scenes. JOSA A, 33(9):1798–1811,
2016.
[8] A Ardeshir Goshtasby. Fusion of multi-exposure images.
Image and Vision Computing, 23(6):611–618, 2005.
[9] Maciej Gryka, Michael Terry, and Gabriel J Brostow. Learn-
ing to remove soft shadows. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
34(5):1–15, 2015.
[10] Qing Guo, Felix Juefei-Xu, Xiaofei Xie, Lei Ma, Jian Wang,
Bing Yu, Wei Feng, and Yang Liu. Watch out! motion is
blurring the vision of your deep neural networks. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33, 2020.
[11] Qing Guo, Jingyang Sun, Felix Juefei-Xu, Lei Ma, Xiaofei
Xie, Wei Feng, and Yang Liu. Efﬁcientderain: Learning
pixel-wise dilation ﬁltering for high-efﬁciency single-image
deraining. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
2021.
[12] Qing Guo, Xiaofei Xie, Felix Juefei-Xu, Lei Ma, Zhongguo
Li, Wanli Xue, Wei Feng, and Yang Liu. SPARK: Spatial-
aware Online Incremental Attack Against Visual Tracking. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision,
Aug 2020.
[13] Ruiqi Guo, Qieyun Dai, and Derek Hoiem. Paired regions for
shadow detection and removal. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35(12):2956–2967, 2012.
[14] Xiaowei Hu, Chi-Wing Fu, Lei Zhu, Jing Qin, and Pheng-Ann
Heng. Direction-aware spatial context features for shadow de-
tection and removal. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 42(11):2795–2808, 2020.
[15] Xiaowei Hu, Yitong Jiang, Chi-Wing Fu, and Pheng-Ann
Heng. Mask-shadowgan: Learning to remove shadows from
unpaired data. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2472–2481, 2019.
[16] Cláudio Rosito Jung. Efﬁcient background subtraction and
shadow removal for monochromatic video sequences. IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia, 11(3):571–577, 2009.
[17] Hieu Le and Dimitris Samaras. Shadow removal via shadow
image decomposition. In Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision, pages 8578–8587,
2019.
[18] Hieu Le and Dimitris Samaras. From shadow segmentation
to shadow removal. In Proceedings of the IEEE European
Conference on Computer Vision, 2020.
[19] Shutao Li, Xudong Kang, and Jianwen Hu. Image fusion with
guided ﬁltering. IEEE Transactions on Image processing,
22(7):2864–2875, 2013.
[20] Yu Li, Sheng Tang, Rui Zhang, Yongdong Zhang, Jintao Li,
and Shuicheng Yan. Asymmetric gan for unpaired image-to-
image translation. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
28(12):5881–5896, 2019.
[21] Kede Ma, Zhengfang Duanmu, Hojatollah Yeganeh, and Zhou
Wang. Multi-exposure image fusion by optimizing a struc-
tural similarity index. IEEE Transactions on Computational
Imaging, 4(1):60–72, 2017.
[22] Kede Ma, Zhengfang Duanmu, Hanwei Zhu, Yuming Fang,
and Zhou Wang. Deep guided learning for fast multi-exposure
image fusion.
IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
29:2808–2819, 2019.
[23] Tom Mertens, Jan Kautz, and Frank Van Reeth. Exposure
fusion: A simple and practical alternative to high dynamic
range photography. In Computer graphics forum, volume 28,
pages 161–171. Wiley Online Library, 2009.
[24] Sohail Nadimi and Bir Bhanu. Physical models for moving
shadow and object detection in video. IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 26(8):1079–1087,
2004.
[25] Patrick Pérez, Michel Gangnet, and Andrew Blake. Poisson
image editing. ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 Papers, pages 313–
318, 2003.
[26] K Ram Prabhakar, V Sai Srikar, and R Venkatesh Babu. Deep-
fuse: A deep unsupervised approach for exposure fusion with
extreme exposure image pairs. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision, volume 1, page 3,
2017.
[27] Liangqiong Qu, Jiandong Tian, Shengfeng He, Yandong Tang,
and Rynson WH Lau. Deshadownet: A multi-context em-
bedding deep network for shadow removal. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 4067–4075, 2017.
[28] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net:
Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
In International Conference on Medical image computing
and computer-assisted intervention, pages 234–241. Springer,
2015.
[29] Andres Sanin, Conrad Sanderson, and Brian C Lovell. Im-
proved shadow removal for robust person tracking in surveil-
lance scenarios.
In International Conference on Pattern
Recognition, pages 141–144. IEEE, 2010.
[30] Yael Shor and Dani Lischinski. The shadow meets the mask:
Pyramid-based shadow removal. In Computer Graphics Fo-
rum, volume 27, pages 577–586. Wiley Online Library, 2008.

[31] Tomas F Yago Vicente, Minh Hoai, and Dimitris Samaras.
Leave-one-out kernel optimization for shadow detection and
removal. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 40(3):682–695, 2017.
[32] Jifeng Wang, Xiang Li, and Jian Yang. Stacked conditional
generative adversarial networks for jointly learning shadow
detection and shadow removal. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 1788–1797, 2018.
[33] Chunxia Xiao, Ruiyun She, Donglin Xiao, and Kwan-Liu Ma.
Fast shadow removal using adaptive multi-scale illumination
transfer. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 32, pages
207–218. Wiley Online Library, 2013.
[34] Saining Xie, Ross Girshick, Piotr Dollár, Zhuowen Tu, and
Kaiming He. Aggregated residual transformations for deep
neural networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1492–1500,
2017.
[35] Ling Zhang, Qing Zhang, and Chunxia Xiao. Shadow re-
mover: Image shadow removal based on illumination recov-
ering optimization. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
24(11):4623–4636, 2015.
[36] Wuming Zhang, Xi Zhao, Jean-Marie Morvan, and Liming
Chen. Improving shadow suppression for illumination robust
face recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, 41(3):611–624, 2018.
[37] Lei Zhu, Zijun Deng, Xiaowei Hu, Chi-Wing Fu, Xuemiao
Xu, Jing Qin, and Pheng-Ann Heng. Bidirectional feature
pyramid network with recurrent attention residual modules for
shadow detection. In Proceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 121–136, 2018.